# Classes

A _class_ is the set of instructions that describe how an instance can behave and what information it contains.

## Constructors

In order to create an object (an instance of a class), we need a constructor method. The constructor is defined within the class.

```java

public class Car {  

  public Car() {  
    // Instructions for creating a Car instance  
  }  
  
  public static void main(String[] args) {  
    // To create an instance, we need to call or invoke the constructor within main().
    Car ferrari = new Car();  
  }  
}
```

# Objects

A Java object is a member (also called an instance) of a Java class. Each object has an identity, a behaviour and a state.
## Identity
The identity is a characteristic used to uniquely identify that object – such as a random ID number or an address in memory. Simpler objects like a lighter may have only two states (on and off) and behaviours (turn on, turn off), but they still have an identity (that item’s manufacturing ID, for example).
## State
_State_ refers to the attributes of an object. Can be defined using instance variables, or instance fields, which are placed inside of a class.
## Behaviour
The object’s behavior is exposed through methods that operate its internal state.
### Non-Static Methods
A non-static method is a method that belongs to a class.
## The this Keyword
The `this` keyword refers to the current object in a method or constructor.
## The .toString() Method
If an object is placed inside of a print statement, the output shows the data type of the object (the class name) followed by the memory address of the object:

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {  
	Cat myCat = new Cat("mew");  
	System.out.println(myCat); // Prints: Cat@6bc7c054
}
```

The `.toString()` method can be added to a class in order to create a unique output when printing an object.
```java
  ...
  public String toString() {  
    return "The cat with " + numLives + " lives says " + noise;  
  }
  ...
```

# Scope
_Scope_ defines where a certain variable or method is accessible in a program.
## Variable Scope
### Class Level Scope
Any variable declared within a class is accessible by all methods in that class. Depending on its access modifier (ie. public or private), it can sometimes be accessed outside the class.
### Method Level Scope(local variables)
Any variable declared within a method, arguments included, is NOT accessible outside that method.
### Block Scope(loop variables)
Any variable declared in a for loop condition is not accessible after the loop.
# Inheritance
Inheritance is the concept of allowing a class to inherit the methods and properties of another class. 
## Superclasses and Subclasses
Superclasses refer to the class that another class inherits from. Subclasses refer to the class that inherits qualities from another class. 

An object of a subclass inherits all the available instance variables and methods provided in the superclass class.

Inheritance is done by including the `extends` keyword followed by the name of the superclass:
```java
...
class Triangle extends Shape { 
...
```

## The super() Method

When an instance of a subclass is created, the subclass’ constructor will automatically invoke the superclass’ constructor. The super() method allows us to control what arguments are sent to the superclass constructor when creating an object of the subclass.
```java
class Shape {  
  int numSides;  
  Shape(int numSides) {  
    this.numSides = numSides;  
  }  
}  
  
class Triangle extends Shape {  
  Triangle() {  
    // Use super() to call the Shape constructor:  
    super(3);  
  }  
  
  public static void main(String[] args) {  
    Shape sq = new Shape(4);  
    Triangle tri = new Triangle();  
  }  
}
```

# Polymorphism

Polymorphism allows a subclass to share the information and behavior of its superclass while also incorporating its own functionality.
## Overriding Superclass Methods

Subclass inherits the methods of superclass.
But, if you need another logic, you can override the superclass method.
```java
// Parent class:  
class Bird {  
  public Bird() {  
    // Instructions for creating a Bird go here:  
  }  
  
  public void move() {  
    System.out.println("The bird flies away");  
  }  
}  
  
// Child class:  
class Penguin extends Bird {  
  public Penguin() {  
    // Instructions for creating a Penguin go here:  
  }  
    
  // Override the parent class method:  
  @Override  
  public void move() {  
    System.out.println("The penguin waddles away");  
  }  
  
  public static void main(String[] args) {  
    Penguin myPenguin = new Penguin();  
    myPenguin.move(); // Prints: The penguin waddles away  
  }  
}
```


Polymorphism makes it possible to send an instance of a subclass somewhere where an instance of the superclass is expected.

For example, if `Monster` is a superclass to the classes `Vampire`, `Werewolf`, and `Zombie`, we can create a `Monster` type `ArrayList` that stores objects from any of `Monster`‘s subclasses:

```java
Monster dracula, wolfman, evilZombie; dracula = new Vampire();wolfman = new Werewolf();evilZombie = new Zombie(); Monster[] monsters = {dracula, wolfman, evilZombie};
```

















