## What is Pastebin

Pastebin like services enable users to store plain text or images over the network (typically the Internet) and generate unique URLs to access the uploaded data.

## Requirements and Goals of the System

### Functional Requirements:

1. Paste 
2. text only
3. Expiration
4. Custom key

### Non-Functional Requirements

1. Availability
2. Consistency
3. Miminal latency

### Extended Requirements

1. Analytics
2. REST API for other services

## Some Design Considerations

1. Limit the pasted text. Let it be 10mb
2. Limit custom keys length

## Capacity Estimation and Constraints

Service is read heavy, assummed ratio is 5:1

### Traffic estimates

Write - 1M/day or `1M / (24 hours * 3600 seconds) ~= 12 pastes/sec`
Read - 5M/day or `5M / (24 hours * 3600 seconds) ~= 58 reads/sec`

### Storage estimates

10mb is maximum uploaded size, lets assume that each paste on average contains 10KB, so per day we will need:
`1M * 10KB => 10 GB/day`

Les store this data for 5 years, so total storage should be:
`10 GB/day * 365days * 5years = 18250GB ~= 18TB`

Total pastes for 5 years:
`1M/day * 365days * 5years = 1825M ~= 1.825B`

base64 key with the length of 6 will give us `64^6 =  68.7B` keys. (`64^5 ~= 1B`, not enough)

One character takes 1 byte at storage, total storage needed for 1.825B keys is:
`1.825B keys * 6 bytes = 10.950B bytes = 10.95GB ~= 11GB`

### Bandwidth estimates

`12 new pastes per second * 10KB = 120KB/sec`

`58 read requests per second * 10KB = 580KB/sec = 0.6MB/sec`

### Memory estimates

80/20 rule, 5M/day total, so we will cache 
`5M * 0.20% * 10kb = 10M kilobytes = 10GB`

## System APIs

1. StoreData
2. GetData
3. RemoveData
4. UpdateData

Params: api_dev_key, paste_data, custom_url, expire_date

## Database Design 

1. During 5 years we need to store Billions of records
2. Each storing object on average is small (10kb)
3. One ralation is needed to track which user created paste
4. Read-heavy

### Database Schema

|Paste | User| 
|------------ | ------------|
| PasteKey(varchar16) | userID(PK, uuid)|
| pasteData(varchar512)| userName(varchar16) | 
| expirationDate|  | 
| userID| LastLogin | 

‘ContentKey’ is a reference to an external object storing the contents of the paste


## High Level Design

1. App layer
2. Storage layer is divided to metadata related to each paste/user and exact paste data (Because for instance Postgres varcahr field max length is **65,535** bytes, but we store 10mb). For storing large objects we can use S3. This division of data will also allow us to scale them individually

### Component Design

Draw chart with Client, App LB, App servers, KeyDB, KeyDB standby, Metadata Storage, Metadata Storage cache,  Object storage, Object storage cache. 

#### a. Application layer

- How the Write request is handled?
- How the Read request is handled?

#### b. Datastore layer

1.  Metadata database: We can use a relational database like MySQL or a Distributed Key-Value store like Dynamo or Cassandra.
2.  Object storage: We can store our contents in an Object Storage like Amazon’s S3. Whenever we feel like hitting our full capacity on content storage, we can easily increase it by adding more servers.

## Purging or DB Cleanup

[[1. URL shortener#Purging or DB cleanup|Please see Designing a URL Shortening service]]

## Data Partitioning and Replication

[[1. URL shortener#Data Partitioning and Replication|Please see Designing a URL Shortening service]]

## Cache and Load Balancer#

[[1. URL shortener#Cache|Please see Designing a URL Shortening service]]

## Security and Permissions

[[1. URL shortener#Security and Permissions|Please see Designing a URL Shortening service]]










