# DT
One of the most common problems faced when moving from a _centralized_ to a _distributed_ system is performing operations across multiple nodes in an atomic way. We call this a **distributed transaction**.
### What ACID means in an application
- **Atomicity** implies that our application does not have to take care of all possible failures, but has the conditional logic to bring the database back to a consistent state in the case of a partial failure.
- **Consistency** lives at db layer and allows us to state the invariants of our application in a declarative way and remove redundant code from our application.
- **Isolation** allows our applications to leverage concurrency and serve multiple requests by executing transactions in parallel, with the certainty that the database prevents any bugs due to the concurrent execution.
- **Durability** guarantees that when the database declares a transaction committed, it is a final declaration that cannot be reverted. This relieves our application of complicated logic again.
### Achieving consistency and durability
Databases provide many different mechanisms that maintain consistency. This includes constraints, cascades, triggers, etc. The application is responsible for defining any constraints through these mechanisms. Meanwhile, the database is responsible for checking these conditions while executing transactions and aborting any transactions that violate them.

Durability is guaranteed by persisting transactions at non-volatile storage when they commit.
### Distributed transaction
A distributed transaction is a transaction that takes place in two or more different nodes. Two common variants of DS:
1. When data is replicated. Usually is handled by single single-master synchronous replication.
2. When data is partitioned (For instance in bank transfer user A and user B lives on different nodes). More common for distributed transactions.
### Atomicity and isolation in distributed transactions
The aspects of _atomicity_ and _isolation_ are significantly more complex and require us to consider more things in the context of distributed transactions.
For instance, partial failures make it much harder to guarantee atomicity. Meanwhile, the concurrency and network asynchrony present in distributed systems make it challenging to preserve isolation between transactions running in different nodes.




