# Atomicity
Guaranteeing _atomicity_ is hard in general, since components can fail unexpectedly regardless of whether they are software or hardware components.

Even writing bytes to file requires extra work to ensure it will be performed in an atomic way and the file will not end up in a corrupted state if the disk fails while executing part of the operation.
### A way to achieve atomicity

One common way of achieving atomicity, in this case, is through **journalling** or **write-ahead** logging. In this technique, metadata about the operation are first written to a separate file, along with markers that denote whether an operation has been completed or not.

Based on this data, the system can identify which operations were in progress when a failure happened, and drive them to completion either by undoing their effects and aborting them, or by completing the remaining part and committing them.
## Atomicity in a distributed system

The issue of _atomicity_ in a distributed system becomes even more complicated because components (nodes in this context) are separated by the network that is slow and unreliable.

In most cases, we need to ensure that the operation needs to take effect either at _all_ the nodes or at _none_ of them. This problem is also known as [**atomic commit**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atomic_commit).
# 2-Phase Commit (2PC)

Just sending a message to the involved nodes would not be enough for executing a distributed transaction, since the sender would not know whether the other nodes committed successfully or failed.

To provide the feedback we will add another round of messages, and check what the result was on each node.

The protocol contains two different roles based on the responsibilities:
1. The **coordinator** is responsible for coordinating the different phases of the protocol
2. The **participants** correspond to all the nodes that participate in the transaction

### Voting phase

The coordinator sends the transaction to all the participants. The participants execute the transaction up to the point where they are supposed to commit.

Then, participants respond to the coordinator with a vote that shows if the transaction’s operations are executed successfully.
### Commit phase

In this phase, the coordinator gathers all the votes from the participants. If all the votes are “Yes”, then the coordinator messages the participants again with an instruction to commit the transaction.

Otherwise, if at least one vote is “No”, the coordinator instructs the participants to abort the transaction. Finally, the participants reply with an acknowledgment and close this phase.

The _coordinator_ and the _participants_ make use of a **write-ahead-log**, and only coordinator uses a **timeout** when waiting for the responses from the first phase. If the timeout expires, the coordinator interprets this timeout as a No vote and considers the node as failed.

On the other hand, the _participants_ do not apply any timeouts while waiting for the coordinator’s messages, since that could lead to participants reaching different conclusions due to timing issues.

## Handling failures

### Failure of a participant in the voting phase

If a participant fails in the voting phase before replying to the coordinator, the coordinator will timeout waiting and assume a _No_ vote on behalf of this participant.

### Failure of a participant in the commit phase

In this scenario, a participant votes in the voting phase but then fails before it receives the message from the coordinator and completes the transaction (either by committing or abort).

In this case, the protocol will conclude without this node. If this node recovers, later on, it will identify that pending transaction and communicate with the _coordinator_ to find out what the result was, and conclude it in the same way.
## Blocking nature of 2-phase commit protocol

If a coordinator fails after sending a prepared message to the participants, the participants will wait for the coordinator to recover and find out the outcome of the transaction, so that they commit or abort it as needed.

failures of the coordinator can decrease the _availability_ of the system significantly. Moreover, if the data from the coordinator’s disk cannot be recovered (e.g., due to disk corruption), the result of pending transactions cannot be discovered, and manual intervention might be needed to unblock the protocol.

## Conclusion

The 2PC protocol satisfies the _safety_ property that ensures all _participants_ always arrive at the same decision (_atomicity_). However, it does not satisfy the liveness property that implies it will always make progress.

# 3-Phase Commit (3PC)

The main bottleneck of the 2-phase commit protocol was failures of the coordinator leading the system to a blocked state.

Ideally, we would like the _participants_ to be able to take the lead in some way and continue the execution of the protocol in this case, but this is not so easy. 
In the commit phase, the _participants_ are not aware of the state of the other participants—only the _coordinator_ is. 

So, taking the lead without waiting for the coordinator can result in breaking the _atomicity_ property.

Example: in the commit phase, the coordinator manages to send a commit (or abort) message to one of the participants but then fails, and this participant also fails. If one of the other participants takes the lead, it will only be able to query the live participants. 
So, it will be unable to make the right decision without waiting for the failed participant (or the coordinator) to recover.

## Tackling the 2PC problem with 3-phase commit protocol

The 2-phase commit problem could be tackled by splitting the first round (voting phase) into 2 sub-rounds, where the coordinator first communicates the votes result to the nodes, waits for an acknowledgment, and then proceeds with the commit or abort message.

In this case, the participants would know the result from the votes and complete the protocol independently in case of a coordinator failure.

The main benefit of this protocol is that the coordinator stops being a single point of failure.

A participant taking over can commit the transaction if it receives a **prepare-to-commit**, knowing that all the participants have voted “Yes”.

## Conclusion

The 3PC protocol satisfies the _liveness_ property that ensures it will always make progress, at the cost of violating the _safety_ property of _atomicity_.

# Quorum-Based Commit Protocol

The main issue with the 3PC protocol occurs at the end of the second phase, where a potential network partition can bring the system to an inconsistent state.

This can happen when participants attempt to unblock the protocol by taking the lead without having a picture of the overall system, resulting in a split-brain situation.

Quorum-based commit protocol leverages the concept of a _quorum_ to ensure that different sides of a partition do not arrive at conflicting results.

The protocol establishes the concept of a **commit quorum Vc** and an **abort quorum Va**.

The values of the abort and commit quorums have to be selected so that the following property holds:

```
Va​ + Vc​ > V
```

### Sub-protocols in quorum-based commit protocol

- The **commit** protocol, which is used when a new transaction starts
- The **termination** protocol, which is used when there is a network partition
- The **merge** protocol, which is used when the system recovers from a network partition
#### Commit protocol
This protocol is very similar to the 3PC protocol. The only difference is that the coordinator waits for Vc number of acknowledgments at the end of the third phase to proceed with committing the transaction.

#### Termination protocol
If there is a network partition at this stage, the coordinator can be rendered unable to complete the transaction. In this case, the participants on each side of a partition will investigate whether they can complete the transaction, using the following protocol.

Initially, a (surrogate) coordinator will be selected from amongst the _participants_ with a leader election. Even if multiple leaders are elected, the correctness of the protocol is not violated.

If there is at least one participant that has committed (or aborted), the coordinator commits (or aborts) the transaction, maintaining the _atomicity_ property.

If there is at least one participant at the prepare-to-commit state, and at least Vc​ participants waiting for the result of the votes, the _coordinator_ sends prepare-to-commit to the participants and continues to the next step.

Alternatively, if there’s no participant at the prepare-to-commit state and at least Va​ participants waiting for the results vote, the coordinator sends a prepare-to-abort message.
#### Merge protocol
It includes a leader election amongst the leaders of the two partitions that are merged, and then the execution of the termination protocol we described.
## Conclusion
The quorum-based commit protocol satisfies the _safety_ property that ensures that all participants will always arrive at the same decision (_atomicity_). It does not satisfy the _liveness_ property that ensures that it will always make progress, since there are always degenerate, extreme failure cases (e.g., multiple, continuous, and small partitions). However, the quorum-based commit protocol is much more resilient that 2PC and other protocols, and can make progress in the most common types of failures.

