# cargo

- Cargo is Rust’s build system and package manager.
- `cargo new myProject`  - creates scaffold with myProject name 
- `cargo build` - builds code into and places binary to `target/debug`
- `cargo build --release` - compiles with optimizations and places binary to `target/release`. Takes more time. Benchmarks should be run against it.
- `cargo run` - builds and runs the project. Skips compilation if no changes were found. 
- `cargo check` - build projects without producing the binary. Faster than `cargo build`.
- `cargo fmt` formats code
- cargo.lock keeps track of the exact versions of dependencies in your project. It is idiomatic to track cargo.lock in a vcs only for executables, but omitted for libraries.
- the idiomatic place to find packages is [crates.io](https://crates.io/) .

# Code conventions

- developers should use spaces, not tabs

# Modules and structs

- `std::time::SystemTime` can be read as `module::module::struct`
- idiomatic naming: modules are `lowercase`. structs are `camelcase`. variables, methods, and functions are `snake_case`.

## Imports

You don't need imports to run the struct function:

```
let now = std::time::SystemTime::new()
```

But for readability's sake, you should use imports like this:

```
use std::time::SystemTime;
...
let now = SystemTime::now();
```

To import multiple structs use curly brackets:

```
use std::time::{SystemTime, Duration};
```

To import any struct or module  use * :
```
use std::time::*;
```

## External crates

1. add it first to the `cargo.toml`
2. import `extern crate chrono;` -  where `chrono` our crate name
3. `use chrono;`


# Features

-  represents time as elapsed time since the Unix epoch.
- `+` operator can be used not primitive types(SystemTime for ex), if `SystemTime::add` implements the `add<duration>` trait. From that, rust can determine how to apply `SystemTime + Duration`
- `traits` are like supercharged go interfaces. implementing a trait in Rust produces approximately the same effect as implementing an interface in go. In Rust, though, implementing a trait must be done explicitly ( `impl mytrait for mytype {}` ).
- Formatting:
	- `{}` will print the thing in its "display mode" (e.g. with the intention of displaying it to users). Structs must implement a `display`
	- `{:?}` will print the thing in its "debug mode". Structs must implement `debug`
- several returns should be wrapped in round brackets: `let (is_pm, _) = Local::now().hour12();`
- you can directly take any element of a returned tuple by `now.hour12().0`, where 0 is an element position.
- no initializer in an `if-else` clause. but you can assign `if-else` results to a variable(note semicolons absence):
```    
let day_part = if is_pm {
	"Afternoon"
} else {
	"Morning"
};
```
- semicolons are required but should be skipped in `if-else` statements with assignments
- `match { => EXPRESSION,}` is a `switch{ case: EXPRESSION}` replacement
- Methods are defined within the context of a struct and their first parameter is _always_ `self`.
- `->` annotates the returned type from the function

