# Variables and Mutability

`variables` are immutable by default. To make it mutable add `mut` after `let`

`constants`:
- Are always immutable(no `mut` after `const`)
-  The const type must be annotated 
- Upper-Snake-Cased (`THREE_HOURS_IN_SECONDS`)
- are valid for the entire time a program runs, within the scope they were declared in

## Shadowing

You can use the same name with `let` declaration, you can even change type
 
```rust
fn main() {
    let x = "5"; // string type
    let x = x.parse::<i32>().unwrap() + 1; // convert to int and add 1
    {
        let x = x * 2; // inner scope, which doesn't shadow
        println!("The value of x in the inner scope is: {x}");
    }
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}
// The value of x in the inner scope is: 12  
// The value of x is: 6 
```

If we remove `let` at `let x = x * 2;` we will get `cannot assign twice to immutable variable` until we add `mut` to `let x = x.parse::<i32>().unwrap() + 1;`

The other difference between `mut` and shadowing is that because we’re effectively creating a new variable when we use the `let` keyword again, we can change the type of the value but reuse the same name.
```rust
let spaces = " "; 
let spaces = spaces.len();
```

However, if we try to use `mut` for this, as shown here, we’ll get a compile-time error:
```rust
let mut spaces = "   ";
spaces = spaces.len(); // Error: expected `&str`, found `usize`
```

# Data Types

Rust is a _statically typed_ language, which means that it must know the types of all variables at compile time.

## Annotation

Is the way to tell Rust about the value type, for example:
```rust
let guess: u32 = "42".parse().expect("Not a number!");
```
If we don't specify the guess type with u32`, the compiler will return an error because several data types can be parsed from the string.

## Scalar Types

A scalar type represents a single value(ntegers, floating-point numbers, Booleans, and characters).

### Integer

- integer types default to `i32`
- Signed integers have a sign - plus or minus. (range  is from-(2n - 1) to 2n - 1 - 1, for example `i8` can store numbers from `-(2^(8-1)) to 2^(8-1) - 1` = ` -128 to 127`)
- Unsigned integers are >=0 (`u8` can store numbers `from 0 to 2^8 - 1 or from 0 to 255`)
- `isize` and `usize` types depend on the architecture of the computer your program is running on. It is calculated during compilation.
- Number literals can also use `_` as a visual separator to make the number easier to read, such as `1_000_000`
- Integer Overflow in debug mode compiling will cause a panic, in release mode with the `--release` flag those checks are absent and it will end up with wrap around (for u8 256 will be 0, 257 will be 1, etc.). You can handle it in code by using standard library methods provided for primitive numeric types.
- Integer division rounds down to the nearest integer.

### Foating-point

The default type is `f64` (not f32) and all floating-point types are signed
```rust
let x = 2.0; // f64
let y: f32 = 3.0; // f32
```

### Booleans

Booleans are one byte in size

### Characters

Rust’s `char` type is the most primitive alphabetic type. 
```rust
let c = 'z'; // single quotes
```

Rust’s `char` type is four bytes in size and represents a Unicode Scalar Value, which means it can represent a lot more than just ASCII.

## Compound Types

Rust has two primitive compound types: tuples and arrays.

### The Tuple Type

- groups together different data types.
- has fixed length
```rust
let tup: (i32, f64, u8) = (500, 6.4, 1);
```

To get the individual values out of a tuple, we can `destructure` a tuple:
```rust
let (x, y, z) = tup;
```

We can also access a tuple element directly by using a period (`.`), starting from 0:
```rust
let five_hundred = tup.2;
```

The tuple without any values has a special name, a _unit_. This value also represents an empty value or an empty return type.

### The Array Type

- the same type of elements
- fixed size, if you need a dynamic array, you should use vectors

```rust
let a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
let b: [i32; 5] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
// You can also initialize an array to contain the same value
let a = [3; 5]; // [3, 3, 3, 3, 3];

// To access the element: 
let first = a[0];
```

# Functions

- The statement doesn't have a returning value. Examples:
      - Creating a variable and assigning a value to it with the `let` keyword is a statement.
      - Function definitions are also statements;
- The expression has a returning value. Examples:
      - Math operation, such as `5 + 6` is is an expression and it evaluates to the value `11`
      - Calling a function is an expression
      - Calling a macro is an expression
      - A new scope block created with curly brackets is an expression
      - Numbers by themselves are also expressions

```rust
//There is no semicolon because it’s an expression whose value we want to return.
fn sum(a: i32, b: i32) -> i32 {
    a + b 
}

// If we place a semicolon, it will change from an expression to a statement, and we need an explicit return to avoid an error.
fn sum(a: i32, b: i32) -> i32 {
    return a + b;
}
```

Calling a function is an expression. Calling a macro is an expression. A new scope block created with curly brackets is an expression, for example:
```rust
fn main() {
    let y = {
        let x = 3;
        x + 1
    };

    println!("The value of y is: {y}");
}
// The value of y is: 4
```

Expressions do not include ending semicolons. If you add a semicolon to the end of an expression, you turn it into a statement, and it will then not return a value.

Note: unlike Go, Rust doesn't have names for return values.


# Comments

Similar to Golang but there is no `/* */`  multiline comment option

# Control Flow

## if - else if
In the case of many "`else if`" after "`if`" Rust only executes the block for the first `true` condition,  and once it finds one, it doesn’t even check the rest.

Many "else if" can be replaced by `match` construct

## Using if in a let Statement

Because the `if` is an expression, we can use it on the right side of a let statement to assign the outcome to a variable:

```rust
fn main() {
    let condition = true;
    let number = if condition { 5 } else { 6 };

    println!("The value of number is: {number}");
}
```

Note, that both statements in if and else blocks should be evaluated to the same type, otherwise compilation will fail.

## Repetition with Loops

### loop

The `loop` keyword tells Rust to execute a block of code over and over again forever or until you explicitly tell it to stop.
```rust
fn main() {
    loop {
        println!("again!");
    }
}
```

You might also need to pass the result of that operation out of the loop.  To do this, you can add the value you want to be returned after the `break` expression. After the loop, we use a semicolon to end the statement that assigns the value to the `result`:
```rust
fn main() {
    let mut counter = 0;

    let result = loop {
        counter += 1;

        if counter == 10 {
            break counter * 2;
        }
    };

    println!("The result is {result}"); 
}
// The result is 20
```

### Break and continue
If you have loops within loops, `break` and `continue` to apply to the innermost loop at that point.
You can target the outside loop by marking it with a label and then using this label with a `break` or `continue` statement:
```rust
fn main() {
    let mut count = 0;
    'counting_up: loop {
        println!("count = {count}");
        let mut remaining = 10;

        loop {
            println!("remaining = {remaining}");
            if remaining == 9 {
                break;
            }
            if count == 2 {
                break 'counting_up;
            }
            remaining -= 1;
        }

        count += 1;
    }
    println!("End count = {count}");
}

```

### while

While is a Conditional Loop, the loop runs as long as the conditional is true:
```rust
let mut number = 1;
while number < 4 {
	number += 1;
	println!("{number}!");
}
```

### for
`for` runs over the collection (range in golang):
```rust
let a = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50];

for element in a {
	println!("the value is: {element}");
}
```

Also, you can use `for` instead of `while`:
```rust
for number in 1..4 { // golang: number := 1; number < 4; number++
	println!("{number}!");
}
```
