# Structs

`Struct` is a custom data type that lets you package together and name multiple related values that make up a meaningful group.
```
struct User {
    username: String,
    email: String, // comma in the end
}
```

Entire struct must be mutable, Rust doesn’t allow us to mark only certain fields as mutable.

##  field init shorthand

In constructor if you have the same param names as in struct, you can skip field names for that params:
```
struct User {
    email: String,
    sign_in_count: u64,
}

// Because the `email` field and the `email` parameter have the same name, we only need to write `email` rather than `email: email`
fn build_user(email: String) -> User {
    User {
        email, 
        sign_in_count: 1,
    }
}
```

## struct update syntax

Lets us create a new instance of a struct that includes most of the values from another instance, but changes some.
```
fn main() {
    let user2 = User {
        email: String::from("another@example.com"),
        ..user1 // The `..user1` must come last
    };
}
```

The syntax `..` specifies that the remaining fields not explicitly set should have the same value as the fields in the given instance.

! If you assign types that is not implement `Copy` trait, original struct instanse goes out of scope, because you perfom `moving` the data.

## Tuple structs

Structs that look similar to tuples, they are useful when you want to give the whole tuple a name and make the tuple a different type from other tuples, and when naming each field as in a regular struct would be verbose or redundant:
```
struct Color(i32, i32, i32);
struct Point(i32, i32, i32);

fn main() {
    let black = Color(0, 0, 0);
    let origin = Point(0, 0, 0);
}
```

## Unit-Like Structs

Structs with no fields, they can be useful when you need to implement a trait on some type but don’t have any data that you want to store in the type itself.
```
struct AlwaysEqual;

fn main() {
    let subject = AlwaysEqual;
}
```

Rust _does_ include functionality to print out debugging information, but we have to explicitly opt in to make that functionality available for our struct. To do that, we add the outer attribute `#[derive(Debug)]`:
`dbg!` macro takes the ownership and returns it, and it prints filename and line:
```
#[derive(Debug)]
struct Rectangle {
    width: u32,
    height: u32,
}

fn main() {
    let scale = 2;
    let rect1 = Rectangle {
        width: dbg!(30 * scale),
        height: 50,
    };

    dbg!(&rect1);
}
// [src/main.rs:10] 30 * scale = 60 
// [src/main.rs:14] &rect1 = Rectangle { width: 60, height: 50, }
```

## Methods

methods are defined within the context of a struct(or an enum or a trait object), and their first parameter is always `self`, `&self` or `&mut self`:

```
impl Rectangle {
    fn can_hold(&self, other: &Rectangle) -> bool { 
        self.width > other.width && self.height > other.height
    }
}
```

- Each struct is allowed to have multiple `impl` blocks (There’s no reason to separate these methods into multiple `impl` blocks here, but this is valid syntax.)
- `&self` is actually short for `self: &Self`
- Everything within this `impl` block will be associated with the `Rectangle` type
- Methods can take ownership of `self`, borrow `self` immutably as we’ve done here, or borrow `self` mutably(`&mut self`)
- `self` which takes the ownership uses rare, for case where you want to transform original object and make it not available after calling.

### Associated Functions

- All functions defined within an `impl` block are called _associated functions_
- Don’t have `self` as their first parameter because they don’t need an instance of the type to work with.
- Often used for constructors that will return a new instance of the struct
```
impl Rectangle {
    fn square(size: u32) -> Self {
        Self {
            width: size,
            height: size,
        }
    }
}
```

- To call this associated function, we use the `::` syntax with the struct name;
```
let sq = Rectangle::square(3);
```

