# A step by step guide

## Requirements clarifications

Ask questions about the exact scope of the problem we are trying to solve.

## Scale estimation

Understanding the scale of the system will help later when we focus on scaling, partitioning, load balancing, and caching.

### Traffic estimates

How many read/write request per second we are going to have? Start from month estimate and then narrow down to one second.

### Storage estimates

How long we are going to store data? How much disk space do we need for it? 

### Bandwidth estimates

Which internet speed do we need to cover incoming(write) and outgoing(read) data?

### Memory estimates

Which cache size do you need to cache the most frequent requests? Consider period of one day. Go with 20/80 rule, make an assumption that 20% items generate 80% traffic.

### High-level estimates


## System interface definition

This will establish the exact contract expected from the system and ensure if we haven’t gotten any requirements wrong.

## Defining data model

Defining the data model in the early part of the interview will clarify how data will flow between different system components. Later, it will guide for data partitioning and management. The candidate should identify various system entities, how they will interact with each other, and different aspects of data management like storage, transportation, encryption, etc.

## High-level design

Draw a block diagram with 5-6 boxes representing the core components of our system. We should identify enough components that are needed to solve the actual problem from end to end.

## Detailed design

Dig deeper into two or three major components; the interviewer’s feedback should always guide us to what parts of the system need further discussion. We should present different approaches, their pros and cons, and explain why we will prefer one approach over the other. Remember, there is no single answer; the only important thing is to consider tradeoffs between different options while keeping system constraints in mind.

## Identifying and resolving bottlenecks

Try to discuss as many bottlenecks as possible and different approaches to mitigate them.


